Glossary (#566)
mozilla/data-docs: src/concepts/terminology.md

# Terminology

## Table of Contents

This glossary provides definitions for commonly-used terms at Mozilla.

> <!-- TOC -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- toc -->
```

> - [Terminology](#terminology)
>     - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
>     - [AET](#aet)
>     - [Analyst](#analyst)
>     - [Amplitude](#amplitude)
>     - [BigQuery](#bigquery)
>     - [Client ID](#client-id)
>     - [Data Analyst](#data-analyst)
>     - [Data Practioner](#data-practioner)
>     - [Data Scientist](#data-scientist)
>     - [dataset](#dataset)
>         - [derived dataset](#derived-dataset)
>     - [DAU](#dau)
>     - [derived dataset](#derived-dataset)
>     - [Fenix](#fenix)
>     - [FxA](#fxa)
>     - [Glean](#glean)
>     - [GCP](#gcp)
>     - [GeoIP](#geoip)
>     - [ingestion](#ingestion)
>     - [Intensity](#intensity)
>     - [metric](#metric)
>     - [MAU](#mau)
>     - [Notebook Interface](#notebook-interface)
>     - [ping](#ping)
>     - [ping table](#ping-table)
>     - [pipeline](#pipeline)
>     - [probe](#probe)
>     - [profile](#profile)
>     - [query](#query)
>     - [retention](#retention)
>     - [Retention](#retention)
>         - [-Week New Profile Retention](#-week-new-profile-retention)
>         - [-Week Retention](#-week-retention)
>     - [schema](#schema)
>     - [session](#session)
>     - [structured ingestion](#structured-ingestion)
>     - [scheduled query](#scheduled-query)
>     - [sql.telemetry.mozilla.org](#sqltelemetrymozillaorg)
>     - [STMO](#stmo)
>     - [Telemetry](#telemetry)
>         - [WAU](#wau)
> 

Reviewer: This should be automatically generated by the table of contents:

```suggestion
```

> <!-- /TOC -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## AET

Account Ecosystem Telemetry; see the [PRD](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yRLiD8JuaZIIaKhs6DhXEa7aH8jwOau5yW0kHaldFQU/edit#)

## Analyst

A data analyst is someone who looks at Mozilla data, identifies trends and other qualitative measurements in them, and creates charts and dashboards.

## Amplitude

A third-party product used by several teams within Mozilla for analysis of user events.

## BigQuery

[BigQuery](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery) is Google Cloud's managed data warehouse. Most of the data described on this site is stored and queried using BigQuery. See the [Accessing and working with BigQuery](https://docs.telemetry.mozilla.org/cookbooks/bigquery.html0) article for more details.

## Client ID

> The id property of the Firefox browser returns the universally unique identifier of the Client object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A unique id identifying the client who sent a [ping](#ping).
```

## Data Analyst

See [Analyst](#Analyst)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Data Practioner

See [Analyst](#Analyst)

## Data Scientist

> Data scientists at Mozilla are a team with a broad array of technical backgrounds and a core set of common professional skills: 1) applying statistical methods to noisy data to answer questions about what, how, or why something is happening; 2) transform unstructured data into usable metrics and models; and 3) augmenting strategic product and decision-making with empirical evidence created and curated by the team.

Reviewer: We should probably double check this definition with data science, but meanwhile we can improve the formatting a bit:

```suggestion
Data scientists at Mozilla are a team with a broad array of technical backgrounds and a core set of common professional skills: 

* applying statistical methods to noisy data to answer questions about what, how, or why something is happening
* transform unstructured data into usable metrics and models
* augmenting strategic product and decision-making with empirical evidence created and curated by the team.
```

> ## dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Dataset
```

> A set of data, which includes ping data, derived datasets, etc.; sometimes it is used synonymously with “table”; sometimes it is used technically to refer to a [BigQuery](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/datasets-intro) dataset, which represents a container for one or more tables.

Reviewer: We should probably add a definition for table as well, now that I look at it.

```suggestion
A set of data, which includes ping data, derived datasets, etc.; sometimes it is used synonymously with “table”; sometimes it is used technically to refer to a [BigQuery](#bigquery) dataset, which represents a container for one or more tables.
```

> 
> ### derived dataset
> 
> A processed dataset, such as `main_summary` or the `clients_daily` dataset
> 
> 

Reviewer: Seems to be a less refined version of the definition below, guessing this got included by mistake.

```suggestion
```

## DAU

The number of unique profiles active on each day.

> ## derived dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Derived Dataset
```

> A processed dataset, such as the clients_daily dataset. This is in contrast to a raw dataset, which is typically a collection of pings. This data can be computed from some lower-level data, but is stored separately to save the cost and time of re-computing it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A processed dataset, such as [Clients Daily](..datasets/batch_view/clients_daily/reference.md). At Mozilla, this is in contrast to a raw ping table which represents (more or less) the raw data submitted by our users.
```

> ## [Fenix](https://mana.mozilla.org/wiki/display/FIREFOX/Fenix+Home+Page)
> 
> [Firefox](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.mozilla.firefox&hl=en_US) for Android browser.
> 
> ## FxA
> 
> [Firefox Accounts](https://www.mozilla.org/en-CA/firefox/accounts/)
> 

Reviewer: Let's skip these non-data topics. We can refer people to the wiki for more information on them.

```suggestion
```

## Glean

> Glean is Mozilla’s product analytics & telemetry solution that provides a consistent experience and behavior across all of our products. Most of Mozilla's mobile apps, including Fenix, have been adapted to use the Glean SDK. For more information, see the [Glean Overview](https://docs.telemetry.mozilla.org/concepts/glean/glean.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Glean is Mozilla’s product analytics & telemetry solution that provides a consistent experience and behavior across all of our products. Most of Mozilla's mobile apps, including Fenix, have been adapted to use the Glean SDK. For more information, see the [Glean Overview](./glean/glean.html).
```

## GCP

Google Cloud Platform (GCP) is a suite of cloud-computing services that runs on the same infrastructure that Google uses internally for its end-user products.

## GeoIP

IP Geolocation involves attempting to discover the location of an IP address in the real world. IP addresses are assigned to an organization, and as these are ever-changing associations, it can be difficult to determine exactly where in the world an IP address is located. Mozilla’s ingestion infrastructure attempts to perform GeoIP lookup during the data decoding process and subsequently discards the IP address before the message arrives in long-term storage.

> ## ingestion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Ingestion
```

Mozilla's core data platform has been built to support structured ingestion of arbitrary JSON payloads whether they come from browser products on client devices or from server-side applications that have nothing to do with Firefox; any team at Mozilla can hook into structured ingestion by defining a schema and registering it with pipeline. Once a schema is registered, everything else is automatically provisioned, from an HTTPS endpoint for accepting payloads to a set of tables in BigQuery for holding the processed data.

## Intensity

Intuitively, how many days per week do users use the product? Among profilesactive at least once in the week ending on the date specified, the number of days on average they were active during that one-week window.

> ## metric

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Metric
```

A metric is anything that you want to (and can) measure. This differs from a dimension which is a qualitative attribute of data.

## MAU

Monthly Active Users - the number of unique profiles active in the 28-day period ending on a given day. The number of unique profiles active at least once during the 28-day window
ending on the specified day.

> ## Notebook Interface
> 
> JupyterLab is a web-based interactive development environment for Jupyter notebooks, code, and data. It configures and arranges the user interface to support a wide range of workflows in data science, scientific computing, and machine learning. JupyterLab is extensible and modular and can write plugins that add new components and integrate with existing ones.
> 

Reviewer: Let's skip this for now.

```suggestion
```

> ## ping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Ping
```

A ping represents a message that is sent from the Firefox browser to Mozilla’s Telemetry servers. It typically includes information about the browser’s state, user actions, etc.
[for more details](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/telemetry/telemetry/data/common-ping.html)

> ## ping table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Ping Table
```

> A set of pings that is stored in BigQuery as a table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A set of pings that is stored in a BigQuery table. See article on [raw ping datasets](../datasets/pings.md).
```

> ## pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pipeline
```

Mozilla’s data pipeline, which is used to collect Telemetry data from Mozilla’s products and logs from various services.

> The bulk of the data that is handled by this pipeline is Firefox Telemetry data. The same tool-chain is used to collect, store, and analyze data that comes from many sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bulk of the data that is handled by this pipeline is Firefox Telemetry data. The same tool-chain is used to collect, store, and analyze data that comes from many sources.
For more information, see [An overview of Mozilla’s Data Pipeline](./pipeline/gcp_data_pipeline.html).
```

> 
> The code for the ingestion pipeline is available in the [gcp-ingestion](https://github.com/mozilla/gcp-ingestion) repository.
> 

Reviewer: Let's skip the code  reference

```suggestion
```

> ## probe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Probe
```

Measurements for a specific aspect of Firefox are called probes. A single telemetry ping sends many different probes. Probes are either Histograms (recording distributions of data points) or Scalars (recording a single value).

You can search for details about probes by using the [Probe Dictionary](https://probes.telemetry.mozilla.org/). For each probe, the probe dictionary provides:

* A description of the probe
* When a probe started being collected
* Whether data from this probe is collected in the release channel

> ## profile

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Profile
```

> All of the changes a user makes in Firefox, like the home page, what toolbars you use, installed addons, saved passwords and your bookmarks, are all stored in a special folder, called a profile. Telemetry stores archived and pending pings in the profile directory as well as metadata like the client ID. See also [Profile Creation](https://docs.telemetry.mozilla.org/concepts/profile/profile_creation.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of the changes a user makes in Firefox, like the home page, what toolbars you use, installed addons, saved passwords and your bookmarks, are all stored in a special folder, called a profile. Telemetry stores archived and pending pings in the profile directory as well as metadata like the [client id](#client-id). See also [Profile Creation](./profile/profile_creation.html)
```

> ## query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Query
```

> TBD

Reviewer: Let's take a stab at defining this.

```suggestion
Typically refers to a query written in the SQL syntax, run on (for example) [STMO](#stmo).
```

> ## retention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Retention
```

* As in “Data retention” - how long data is stored before it is automatically deleted/archived

* As in “User retention” - how likely is a user to continue using a product

> ## Retention
> 
> ### 1-Week New Profile Retention
> 
> Among new profiles created on the day specified, what proportion (out of 1) are
> active during the week beginning one week after the day specified.
> 
> ### 1-Week Retention
> 
> Among profiles that were active at least once in the week starting on the
> specified day, what proportion (out of 1) are active during the following week.
> 

Reviewer: Either duplicates or overly specific for a terminology section.

```suggestion
```

## schema

> A schema is the organization or structure for a database. The activity of data modeling leads to a schema. Mozilla’s source schema is available on the [mozilla-services/socorro GitHub repository](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mozilla-services/socorro/main/socorro/schemas/crash_report.json).

Reviewer: I think this isn't quite right. Here's another stab at the concept

```suggestion
A schema is the organization or structure for our data. We use schemas at many levels (in data ingestion and storage) to make sure the data we submit is valid and possible to be processed efficiently.
```

> ## session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Session
```

> The period of time that it takes between Firefox being started until it is shut down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The period of time that it takes between Firefox being started until it is shut down. See also [subsession](#subsession).
```

> * **Subsession**: `Sessions` are split into `subsessions` after every 24-hour time period has passed or the environment has changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Subsession

In Firefox, [Sessions](#sessions) are split into subsessions after every 24-hour time period has passed or the environment has changed.
```

([for more details](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/toolkit/components/telemetry/telemetry/concepts/sessions.html?highlight=subsession))

> ## structured ingestion
> 
> Mozilla’s term for the URI scheme that is used for submitting data to the Telemetry pipeline; contrast this term with “telemetry ingestion” which represents an older URI scheme that is still supported for compatibility with desktop Firefox telemetry
> 

Reviewer: Let's skip this one, it's hard to explain and not necessary for most people to know.

```suggestion
```

> ## scheduled query
> 
> At Mozilla, queries are written in /sql. The directory structure is based on the destination table: /sql/{dataset_id}/{table_name}
> You can schedule queries in [bigquery-etl](https://github.com/mozilla/bigquery-etl) in [Airflow](https://github.com/mozilla/telemetry-airflow) that run regularly with the results written to a table.
> 
> * [In bigquery-etl](https://docs.telemetry.mozilla.org/cookbooks/bigquery-airflow.html#in-bigquery-etl)
> * [Other considerations](https://docs.telemetry.mozilla.org/cookbooks/bigquery-airflow.html#other-considerations)
> 

Reviewer: Let's skip this for now.

```suggestion
```

> ## sql.telemetry.mozilla.org

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## STMO (sql.telemetry.mozilla.org)
```

> A service for creating queries and dashboards. See [STMO under analysis tools](https://docs.telemetry.mozilla.org/tools/interfaces.html#sqltelemetrymozillaorg-stmo).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A service for creating queries and dashboards. See [STMO under analysis tools](../tools/interfaces.html#sqltelemetrymozillaorg-stmo).
```

> ## STMO
> 
> As you use Firefox, Telemetry measures and collects non-personal information, such as performance, hardware, usage and customizations. It then sends this information to Mozilla on a daily basis and we use it to improve Firefox. 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
